The Project Gutenberg eBook, The Life and Adventures of Robinson Crusoe,
by Daniel Defoe


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: The Life and Adventures of Robinson Crusoe


Author: Daniel Defoe



Release Date: April 6, 2010  [eBook #521]
Originally released: February 28, 1996
Last Updated: November 16, 2016

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LIFE AND ADVENTURES OF
ROBINSON CRUSOE***


Transcribed from the 1919 Seeley, Service & Co. edition by David Price,
email ccx074@pglaf.org





                                   The
                           Life and Adventures
                                    of
                             Robinson Crusoe


                                    By
                               Daniel Defoe

                                * * * * *

                   _With Illustrations by H. M. Brock_

                                * * * * *

                                  London
                      Seeley, Service & Co. Limited
                         38 Great Russell Street




CHAPTER I--START IN LIFE


I was born in the year 1632, in the city of York, of a good family,
though not of that country, my father being a foreigner of Bremen, who
settled first at Hull.  He got a good estate by merchandise, and leaving
off his trade, lived afterwards at York, from whence he had married my
mother, whose relations were named Robinson, a very good family in that
country, and from whom I was called Robinson Kreutznaer; but, by the
usual corruption of words in England, we are now called--nay we call
ourselves and write our name--Crusoe; and so my companions always called
me.

I had two elder brothers, one of whom was lieutenant-colonel to an
English regiment of foot in Flanders, formerly commanded by the famous
Colonel Lockhart, and was killed at the battle near Dunkirk against the
Spaniards.  What became of my second brother I never knew, any more than
my father or mother knew what became of me.

Being the third son of the family and not bred to any trade, my head
began to be filled very early with rambling thoughts.  My father, who was
very ancient, had given me a competent share of learning, as far as
house-education and a country free school generally go, and designed me
for the law; but I would be satisfied with nothing but going to sea; and
my inclination to this led me so strongly against the will, nay, the
commands of my father, and against all the entreaties and persuasions of
my mother and other friends, that there seemed to be something fatal in
that propensity of nature, tending directly to the life of misery which
was to befall me.

My father, a wise and grave man, gave me serious and excellent counsel
against what he foresaw was my design.  He called me one morning into his
chamber, where he was confined by the gout, and expostulated very warmly
with me upon this subject.  He asked me what reasons, more than a mere
wandering inclination, I had for leaving father's house and my native
country, where I might be well introduced, and had a prospect of raising
my fortune by application and industry, with a life of ease and pleasure.
He told me it was men of desperate fortunes on one hand, or of aspiring,
superior fortunes on the other, who went abroad upon adventures, to rise
by enterprise, and make themselves famous in undertakings of a nature out
of the common road; that these things were all either too far above me or
too far below me; that mine was the middle state, or what might be called
the upper station of low life, which he had found, by long experience,
was the best state in the world, the most suited to human happiness, not
exposed to the miseries and hardships, the labour and sufferings of the
mechanic part of mankind, and not embarrassed with the pride, luxury,
ambition, and envy of the upper part of mankind.  He told me I might
judge of the happiness of this state by this one thing--viz. that this
was the state of life which all other people envied; that kings have
frequently lamented the miserable consequence of being born to great
things, and wished they had been placed in the middle of the two
extremes, between the mean and the great; that the wise man gave his
testimony to this, as the standard of felicity, when he prayed to have
neither poverty nor riches.

He bade me observe it, and I should always find that the calamities of
life were shared among the upper and lower part of mankind, but that the
middle station had the fewest disasters, and was not exposed to so many
vicissitudes as the higher or lower part of mankind; nay, they were not
subjected to so many distempers and uneasinesses, either of body or mind,
as those were who, by vicious living, luxury, and extravagances on the
one hand, or by hard labour, want of necessaries, and mean or
insufficient diet on the other hand, bring distemper upon themselves by
the natural consequences of their way of living; that the middle station
of life was calculated for all kind of virtue and all kind of enjoyments;
that peace and plenty were the handmaids of a middle fortune; that
temperance, moderation, quietness, health, society, all agreeable
diversions, and all desirable pleasures, were the blessings attending the
middle station of life; that this way men went silently and smoothly
through the world, and comfortably out of it, not embarrassed with the
labours of the hands or of the head, not sold to a life of slavery for
daily bread, nor harassed with perplexed circumstances, which rob the
soul of peace and the body of rest, nor enraged with the passion of envy,
or the secret burning lust of ambition for great things; but, in easy
circumstances, sliding gently through the world, and sensibly tasting the
sweets of living, without the bitter; feeling that they are happy, and
learning by every day's experience to know it more sensibly.

After this he pressed me earnestly, and in the most affectionate manner,
not to play the young man, nor to precipitate myself into miseries which
nature, and the station of life I was born in, seemed to have provided
against; that I was under no necessity of seeking my bread; that he would
do well for me, and endeavour to enter me fairly into the station of life
which he had just been recommending to me; and that if I was not very
easy and happy in the world, it must be my mere fate or fault that must
hinder it; and that he should have nothing to answer for, having thus
discharged his duty in warning me against measures which he knew would be
to my hurt; in a word, that as he would do very kind things for me if I
would stay and settle at home as he directed, so he would not have so
much hand in my misfortunes as to give me any encouragement to go away;
and to close all, he told me I had my elder brother for an example, to
whom he had used the same earnest persuasions to keep him from going into
the Low Country wars, but could not prevail, his young desires prompting
him to run into the army, where he was killed; and though he said he
would not cease to pray for me, yet he would venture to say to me, that
if I did take this foolish step, God would not bless me, and I should
have leisure hereafter to reflect upon having neglected his counsel when
there might be none to assist in my recovery.

I observed in this last part of his discourse, which was truly prophetic,
though I suppose my father did not know it to be so himself--I say, I
observed the tears run down his face very plentifully, especially when he
spoke of my brother who was killed: and that when he spoke of my having
leisure to repent, and none to assist me, he was so moved that he broke
off the discourse, and told me his heart was so full he could say no more
to me.

I was sincerely affected with this discourse, and, indeed, who could be
otherwise? and I resolved not to think of going abroad any more, but to
settle at home according to my father's desire.  But alas! a few days
wore it all off; and, in short, to prevent any of my father's further
importunities, in a few weeks after I resolved to run quite away from
him.  However, I did not act quite so hastily as the first heat of my
resolution prompted; but I took my mother at a time when I thought her a
little more pleasant than ordinary, and told her that my thoughts were so
entirely bent upon seeing the world that I should never settle to
anything with resolution enough to go through with it, and my father had
better give me his consent than force me to go without it; that I was now
eighteen years old, which was too late to go apprentice to a trade or
clerk to an attorney; that I was sure if I did I should never serve out
my time, but I should certainly run away from my master before my time
was out, and go to sea; and if she would speak to my father to let me go
one voyage abroad, if I came home again, and did not like it, I would go
no more; and I would promise, by a double diligence, to recover the time
that I had lost.

This put my mother into a great passion; she told me she knew it would be
to no purpose to speak to my father upon any such subject; that he knew
too well what was my interest to give his consent to anything so much for
my hurt; and that she wondered how I could think of any such thing after
the discourse I had had with my father, and such kind and tender
expressions as she knew my father had used to me; and that, in short, if
I would ruin myself, there was no help for me; but I might depend I
should never have their consent to it; that for her part she would not
have so much hand in my destruction; and I should never have it to say
that my mother was willing when my father was not.

Though my mother refused to move it to my father, yet I heard afterwards
that she reported all the discourse to him, and that my father, after
showing a great concern at it, said to her, with a sigh, "That boy might
be happy if he would stay at home; but if he goes abroad, he will be the
most miserable wretch that ever was born: I can give no consent to it."

It was not till almost a year after this that I broke loose, though, in
the meantime, I continued obstinately deaf to all proposals of settling
to business, and frequently expostulated with my father and mother about
their being so positively determined against what they knew my
inclinations prompted me to.  But being one day at Hull, where I went
casually, and without any purpose of making an elopement at that time;
but, I say, being there, and one of my companions being about to sail to
London in his father's ship, and prompting me to go with them with the
common allurement of seafaring men, that it should cost me nothing for my
passage, I consulted neither father nor mother any more, nor so much as
sent them word of it; but leaving them to hear of it as they might,
without asking God's blessing or my father's, without any consideration
of circumstances or consequences, and in an ill hour, God knows, on the
1st of September 1651, I went on board a ship bound for London.  Never
any young adventurer's misfortunes, I believe, began sooner, or continued
longer than mine.  The ship was no sooner out of the Humber than the wind
began to blow and the sea to rise in a most frightful manner; and, as I
had never been at sea before, I was most inexpressibly sick in body and
terrified in mind.  I began now seriously to reflect upon what I had
done, and how justly I was overtaken by the judgment of Heaven for my
wicked leaving my father's house, and abandoning my duty.  All the good
counsels of my parents, my father's tears and my mother's entreaties,
came now fresh into my mind; and my conscience, which was not yet come to
the pitch of hardness to which it has since, reproached me with the
contempt of advice, and the breach of my duty to God and my father.

All this while the storm increased, and the sea went very high, though
nothing like what I have seen many times since; no, nor what I saw a few
days after; but it was enough to affect me then, who was but a young
sailor, and had never known anything of the matter.  I expected every
wave would have swallowed us up, and that every time the ship fell down,
as I thought it did, in the trough or hollow of the sea, we should never
rise more; in this agony of mind, I made many vows and resolutions that
if it would please God to spare my life in this one voyage, if ever I got
once my foot upon dry land again, I would go directly home to my father,
and never set it into a ship again while I lived; that I would take his
advice, and never run myself into such miseries as these any more.  Now I
saw plainly the goodness of his observations about the middle station of
life, how easy, how comfortably he had lived all his days, and never had
been exposed to tempests at sea or troubles on shore; and I resolved that
I would, like a true repenting prodigal, go home to my father.

These wise and sober thoughts continued all the while the storm lasted,
and indeed some time after; but the next day the wind was abated, and the
sea calmer, and I began to be a little inured to it; however, I was very
grave for all that day, being also a little sea-sick still; but towards
night the weather cleared up, the wind was quite over, and a charming
fine evening followed; the sun went down perfectly clear, and rose so the
next morning; and having little or no wind, and a smooth sea, the sun
shining upon it, the sight was, as I thought, the most delightful that
ever I saw.

I had slept well in the night, and was now no more sea-sick, but very
cheerful, looking with wonder upon the sea that was so rough and terrible
the day before, and could be so calm and so pleasant in so little a time
after.  And now, lest my good resolutions should continue, my companion,
who had enticed me away, comes to me; "Well, Bob," says he, clapping me
upon the shoulder, "how do you do after it?  I warrant you were frighted,
wer'n't you, last night, when it blew but a capful of wind?"  "A capful
d'you call it?" said I; "'twas a terrible storm."  "A storm, you fool
you," replies he; "do you call that a storm? why, it was nothing at all;
give us but a good ship and sea-room, and we think nothing of such a
squall of wind as that; but you're but a fresh-water sailor, Bob.  Come,
let us make a bowl of punch, and we'll forget all that; d'ye see what
charming weather 'tis now?"  To make short this sad part of my story, we
went the way of all sailors; the punch was made and I was made half drunk
with it: and in that one night's wickedness I drowned all my repentance,
all my reflections upon my past conduct, all my resolutions for the
future.  In a word, as the sea was returned to its smoothness of surface
and settled calmness by the abatement of that storm, so the hurry of my
thoughts being over, my fears and apprehensions of being swallowed up by
the sea being forgotten, and the current of my former desires returned, I
entirely forgot the vows and promises that I made in my distress.  I
found, indeed, some intervals of reflection; and the serious thoughts
did, as it were, endeavour to return again sometimes; but I shook them
off, and roused myself from them as it were from a distemper, and
applying myself to drinking and company, soon mastered the return of
those fits--for so I called them; and I had in five or six days got as
complete a victory over conscience as any young fellow that resolved not
to be troubled with it could desire.  But I was to have another trial for
it still; and Providence, as in such cases generally it does, resolved to
leave me entirely without excuse; for if I would not take this for a
deliverance, the next was to be such a one as the worst and most hardened
wretch among us would confess both the danger and the mercy of.

The sixth day of our being at sea we came into Yarmouth Roads; the wind
having been contrary and the weather calm, we had made but little way
since the storm.  Here we were obliged to come to an anchor, and here we
lay, the wind continuing contrary--viz. at south-west--for seven or eight
days, during which time a great many ships from Newcastle came into the
same Roads, as the common harbour where the ships might wait for a wind
for the river.

We had not, however, rid here so long but we should have tided it up the
river, but that the wind blew too fresh, and after we had lain four or
five days, blew very hard.  However, the Roads being reckoned as good as
a harbour, the anchorage good, and our ground-tackle very strong, our men
were unconcerned, and not in the least apprehensive of danger, but spent
the time in rest and mirth, after the manner of the sea; but the eighth
day, in the morning, the wind increased, and we had all hands at work to
strike our topmasts, and make everything snug and close, that the ship
might ride as easy as possible.  By noon the sea went very high indeed,
and our ship rode forecastle in, shipped several seas, and we thought
once or twice our anchor had come home; upon which our master ordered out
the sheet-anchor, so that we rode with two anchors ahead, and the cables
veered out to the bitter end.

By this time it blew a terrible storm indeed; and now I began to see
terror and amazement in the faces even of the seamen themselves.  The
master, though vigilant in the business of preserving the ship, yet as he
went in and out of his cabin by me, I could hear him softly to himself
say, several times, "Lord be merciful to us! we shall be all lost! we
shall be all undone!" and the like.  During these first hurries I was
stupid, lying still in my cabin, which was in the steerage, and cannot
describe my temper: I could ill resume the first penitence which I had so
apparently trampled upon and hardened myself against: I thought the
bitterness of death had been past, and that this would be nothing like
the first; but when the master himself came by me, as I said just now,
and said we should be all lost, I was dreadfully frighted.  I got up out
of my cabin and looked out; but such a dismal sight I never saw: the sea
ran mountains high, and broke upon us every three or four minutes; when I
could look about, I could see nothing but distress round us; two ships
that rode near us, we found, had cut their masts by the board, being deep
laden; and our men cried out that a ship which rode about a mile ahead of
us was foundered.  Two more ships, being driven from their anchors, were
run out of the Roads to sea, at all adventures, and that with not a mast
standing.  The light ships fared the best, as not so much labouring in
the sea; but two or three of them drove, and came close by us, running
away with only their spritsail out before the wind.

Towards evening the mate and boatswain begged the master of our ship to
let them cut away the fore-mast, which he was very unwilling to do; but
the boatswain protesting to him that if he did not the ship would
founder, he consented; and when they had cut away the fore-mast, the
main-mast stood so loose, and shook the ship so much, they were obliged
to cut that away also, and make a clear deck.

Any one may judge what a condition I must be in at all this, who was but
a young sailor, and who had been in such a fright before at but a little.
But if I can express at this distance the thoughts I had about me at that
time, I was in tenfold more horror of mind upon account of my former
convictions, and the having returned from them to the resolutions I had
wickedly taken at first, than I was at death itself; and these, added to
the terror of the storm, put me into such a condition that I can by no
words describe it.  But the worst was not come yet; the storm continued
with such fury that the seamen themselves acknowledged they had never
seen a worse.  We had a good ship, but she was deep laden, and wallowed
in the sea, so that the seamen every now and then cried out she would
founder.  It was my advantage in one respect, that I did not know what
they meant by _founder_ till I inquired.  However, the storm was so
violent that I saw, what is not often seen, the master, the boatswain,
and some others more sensible than the rest, at their prayers, and
expecting every moment when the ship would go to the bottom.  In the
middle of the night, and under all the rest of our distresses, one of the
men that had been down to see cried out we had sprung a leak; another
said there was four feet water in the hold.  Then all hands were called
to the pump.  At that word, my heart, as I thought, died within me: and I
fell backwards upon the side of my bed where I sat, into the cabin.
However, the men roused me, and told me that I, that was able to do
nothing before, was as well able to pump as another; at which I stirred
up and went to the pump, and worked very heartily.  While this was doing
the master, seeing some light colliers, who, not able to ride out the
storm were obliged to slip and run away to sea, and would come near us,
ordered to fire a gun as a signal of distress.  I, who knew nothing what
they meant, thought the ship had broken, or some dreadful thing happened.
In a word, I was so surprised that I fell down in a swoon.  As this was a
time when everybody had his own life to think of, nobody minded me, or
what was become of me; but another man stepped up to the pump, and
thrusting me aside with his foot, let me lie, thinking I had been dead;
and it was a great while before I came to myself.

We worked on; but the water increasing in the hold, it was apparent that
the ship would founder; and though the storm began to abate a little, yet
it was not possible she could swim till we might run into any port; so
the master continued firing guns for help; and a light ship, who had rid
it out just ahead of us, ventured a boat out to help us.  It was with the
utmost hazard the boat came near us; but it was impossible for us to get
on board, or for the boat to lie near the ship's side, till at last the
men rowing very heartily, and venturing their lives to save ours, our men
cast them a rope over the stern with a buoy to it, and then veered it out
a great length, which they, after much labour and hazard, took hold of,
and we hauled them close under our stern, and got all into their boat.
It was to no purpose for them or us, after we were in the boat, to think
of reaching their own ship; so all agreed to let her drive, and only to
pull her in towards shore as much as we could; and our master promised
them, that if the boat was staved upon shore, he would make it good to
their master: so partly rowing and partly driving, our boat went away to
the northward, sloping towards the shore almost as far as Winterton Ness.

We were not much more than a quarter of an hour out of our ship till we
saw her sink, and then I understood for the first time what was meant by
a ship foundering in the sea.  I must acknowledge I had hardly eyes to
look up when the seamen told me she was sinking; for from the moment that
they rather put me into the boat than that I might be said to go in, my
heart was, as it were, dead within me, partly with fright, partly with
horror of mind, and the thoughts of what was yet before me.

While we were in this condition--the men yet labouring at the oar to
bring the boat near the shore--we could see (when, our boat mounting the
waves, we were able to see the shore) a great many people running along
the strand to assist us when we should come near; but we made but slow
way towards the shore; nor were we able to reach the shore till, being
past the lighthouse at Winterton, the shore falls off to the westward
towards Cromer, and so the land broke off a little the violence of the
wind.  Here we got in, and though not without much difficulty, got all
safe on shore, and walked afterwards on foot to Yarmouth, where, as
unfortunate men, we were used with great humanity, as well by the
magistrates of the town, who assigned us good quarters, as by particular
merchants and owners of ships, and had money given us sufficient to carry
us either to London or back to Hull as we thought fit.

Had I now had the sense to have gone back to Hull, and have gone home, I
had been happy, and my father, as in our blessed Saviour's parable, had
even killed the fatted calf for me; for hearing the ship I went away in
was cast away in Yarmouth Roads, it was a great while before he had any
assurances that I was not drowned.

But my ill fate pushed me on now with an obstinacy that nothing could
resist; and though I had several times loud calls from my reason and my
more composed judgment to go home, yet I had no power to do it.  I know
not what to call this, nor will I urge that it is a secret overruling
decree, that hurries us on to be the instruments of our own destruction,
even though it be before us, and that we rush upon it with our eyes open.
Certainly, nothing but some such decreed unavoidable misery, which it was
impossible for me to escape, could have pushed me forward against the
calm reasonings and persuasions of my most retired thoughts, and against
two such visible instructions as I had met with in my first attempt.

My comrade, who had helped to harden me before, and who was the master's
son, was now less forward than I.  The first time he spoke to me after we
were at Yarmouth, which was not till two or three days, for we were
separated in the town to several quarters; I say, the first time he saw
me, it appeared his tone was altered; and, looking very melancholy, and
shaking his head, he asked me how I did, and telling his father who I
was, and how I had come this voyage only for a trial, in order to go
further abroad, his father, turning to me with a very grave and concerned
tone "Young man," says he, "you ought never to go to sea any more; you
ought to take this for a plain and visible token that you are not to be a
seafaring man."  "Why, sir," said I, "will you go to sea no more?"  "That
is another case," said he; "it is my calling, and therefore my duty; but
as you made this voyage on trial, you see what a taste Heaven has given
you of what you are to expect if you persist.  Perhaps this has all
befallen us on your account, like Jonah in the ship of Tarshish.  Pray,"
continues he, "what are you; and on what account did you go to sea?"
Upon that I told him some of my story; at the end of which he burst out
into a strange kind of passion: "What had I done," says he, "that such an
unhappy wretch should come into my ship?  I would not set my foot in the
same ship with thee again for a thousand pounds."  This indeed was, as I
said, an excursion of his spirits, which were yet agitated by the sense
of his loss, and was farther than he could have authority to go.
However, he afterwards talked very gravely to me, exhorting me to go back
to my father, and not tempt Providence to my ruin, telling me I might see
a visible hand of Heaven against me.  "And, young man," said he, "depend
upon it, if you do not go back, wherever you go, you will meet with
nothing but disasters and disappointments, till your father's words are
fulfilled upon you."

We parted soon after; for I made him little answer, and I saw him no
more; which way he went I knew not.  As for me, having some money in my
pocket, I travelled to London by land; and there, as well as on the road,
had many struggles with myself what course of life I should take, and
whether I should go home or to sea.

As to going home, shame opposed the best motions that offered to my
thoughts, and it immediately occurred to me how I should be laughed at
among the neighbours, and should be ashamed to see, not my father and
mother only, but even everybody else; from whence I have since often
observed, how incongruous and irrational the common temper of mankind is,
especially of youth, to that reason which ought to guide them in such
cases--viz. that they are not ashamed to sin, and yet are ashamed to
repent; not ashamed of the action for which they ought justly to be
esteemed fools, but are ashamed of the returning, which only can make
them be esteemed wise men.

In this state of life, however, I remained some time, uncertain what
measures to take, and what course of life to lead.  An irresistible
reluctance continued to going home; and as I stayed away a while, the
remembrance of the distress I had been in wore off, and as that abated,
the little motion I had in my desires to return wore off with it, till at
last I quite laid aside the thoughts of it, and looked out for a voyage.




CHAPTER II--SLAVERY AND ESCAPE


That evil influence which carried me first away from my father's
house--which hurried me into the wild and indigested notion of raising my
fortune, and that impressed those conceits so forcibly upon me as to make
me deaf to all good advice, and to the entreaties and even the commands
of my father--I say, the same influence, whatever it was, presented the
most unfortunate of all enterprises to my view; and I went on board a
vessel bound to the coast of Africa; or, as our sailors vulgarly called
it, a voyage to Guinea.

It was my great misfortune that in all these adventures I did not ship
myself as a sailor; when, though I might indeed have worked a little
harder than ordinary, yet at the same time I should have learnt the duty
and office of a fore-mast man, and in time might have qualified myself
for a mate or lieutenant, if not for a master.  But as it was always my
fate to choose for the worse, so I did here; for having money in my
pocket and good clothes upon my back, I would always go on board in the
habit of a gentleman; and so I neither had any business in the ship, nor
learned to do any.

It was my lot first of all to fall into pretty good company in London,
which does not always happen to such loose and misguided young fellows as
I then was; the devil generally not omitting to lay some snare for them
very early; but it was not so with me.  I first got acquainted with the
master of a ship who had been on the coast of Guinea; and who, having had
very good success there, was resolved to go again.  This captain taking a
fancy to my conversation, which was not at all disagreeable at that time,
hearing me say I had a mind to see the world, told me if I would go the
voyage with him I should be at no expense; I should be his messmate and
his companion; and if I could carry anything with me, I should have all
the advantage of it that the trade would admit; and perhaps I might meet
with some encouragement.

I embraced the offer; and entering into a strict friendship with this
captain, who was an honest, plain-dealing man, I went the voyage with
him, and carried a small adventure with me, which, by the disinterested
honesty of my friend the captain, I increased very considerably; for I
carried about 40 pounds in such toys and trifles as the captain directed
me to buy.  These 40 pounds I had mustered together by the assistance of
some of my relations whom I corresponded with; and who, I believe, got my
father, or at least my mother, to contribute so much as that to my first
adventure.

This was the only voyage which I may say was successful in all my
adventures, which I owe to the integrity and honesty of my friend the
captain; under whom also I got a competent knowledge of the mathematics
and the rules of navigation, learned how to keep an account of the ship's
course, take an observation, and, in short, to understand some things
that were needful to be understood by a sailor; for, as he took delight
to instruct me, I took delight to learn; and, in a word, this voyage made
me both a sailor and a merchant; for I brought home five pounds nine
ounces of gold-dust for my adventure, which yielded me in London, at my
return, almost 300 pounds; and this filled me with those aspiring
thoughts which have since so completed my ruin.

CHAPTER III--WRECKED ON A DESERT ISLAND

After this stop, we made on to the southward continually for ten or
twelve days, living very sparingly on our provisions, which began to
abate very much, and going no oftener to the shore than we were obliged
to for fresh water.  My design in this was to make the river Gambia or
Senegal, that is to say anywhere about the Cape de Verde, where I was in
hopes to meet with some European ship; and if I did not, I knew not what
course I had to take, but to seek for the islands, or perish there among
the negroes.  I knew that all the ships from Europe, which sailed either
to the coast of Guinea or to Brazil, or to the East Indies, made this
cape, or those islands; and, in a word, I put the whole of my fortune
upon this single point, either that I must meet with some ship or must
perish.

After this stop, we made on to the southward continually for ten or
twelve days, living very sparingly on our provisions, which began to
abate very much, and going no oftener to the shore than we were obliged
to for fresh water.  My design in this was to make the river Gambia or
Senegal, that is to say anywhere about the Cape de Verde, where I was in
hopes to meet with some European ship; and if I did not, I knew not what
course I had to take, but to seek for the islands, or perish there among
the negroes.  I knew that all the ships from Europe, which sailed either
to the coast of Guinea or to Brazil, or to the East Indies, made this
cape, or those islands; and, in a word, I put the whole of my fortune
upon this single point, either that I must meet with some ship or must
perish.

When I had pursued this resolution about ten days longer, as I have said,
I began to see that the land was inhabited; and in two or three places,
as we sailed by, we saw people stand upon the shore to look at us; we
could also perceive they were quite black and naked.  I was once inclined
to have gone on shore to them; but Xury was my better counsellor, and
said to me, "No go, no go."  However, I hauled in nearer the shore that I
might talk to them, and I found they ran along the shore by me a good
way.  I observed they had no weapons in their hand, except one, who had a
long slender stick, which Xury said was a lance, and that they could
throw them a great way with good aim; so I kept at a distance, but talked
with them by signs as well as I could; and particularly made signs for
something to eat: they beckoned to me to stop my boat, and they would
fetch me some meat.  Upon this I lowered the top of my sail and lay by,
and two of them ran up into the country, and in less than half-an-hour
came back, and brought with them two pieces of dried flesh and some corn,
such as is the produce of their country; but we neither knew what the one
or the other was; however, we were willing to accept it, but how to come
at it was our next dispute, for I would not venture on shore to them, and
they were as much afraid of us; but they took a safe way for us all, for
they brought it to the shore and laid it down, and went and stood a great
way off till we fetched it on board, and then came close to us again.

We made signs of thanks to them, for we had nothing to make them amends;
but an opportunity offered that very instant to oblige them wonderfully;
for while we were lying by the shore came two mighty creatures, one
pursuing the other (as we took it) with great fury from the mountains
towards the sea; whether it was the male pursuing the female, or whether
they were in sport or in rage, we could not tell, any more than we could
tell whether it was usual or strange, but I believe it was the latter;
because, in the first place, those ravenous creatures seldom appear but
in the night; and, in the second place, we found the people terribly
frighted, especially the women.  The man that had the lance or dart did
not fly from them, but the rest did; however, as the two creatures ran
directly into the water, they did not offer to fall upon any of the
negroes, but plunged themselves into the sea, and swam about, as if they
had come for their diversion; at last one of them began to come nearer
our boat than at first I expected; but I lay ready for him, for I had
loaded my gun with all possible expedition, and bade Xury load both the
others.  As soon as he came fairly within my reach, I fired, and shot him
directly in the head; immediately he sank down into the water, but rose
instantly, and plunged up and down, as if he were struggling for life,
and so indeed he was; he immediately made to the shore; but between the
wound, which was his mortal hurt, and the strangling of the water, he
died just before he reached the shore.

It is impossible to express the astonishment of these poor creatures at
the noise and fire of my gun: some of them were even ready to die for
fear, and fell down as dead with the very terror; but when they saw the
creature dead, and sunk in the water, and that I made signs to them to
come to the shore, they took heart and came, and began to search for the
creature.  I found him by his blood staining the water; and by the help
of a rope, which I slung round him, and gave the negroes to haul, they
dragged him on shore, and found that it was a most curious leopard,
spotted, and fine to an admirable degree; and the negroes held up their
hands with admiration, to think what it was I had killed him with.

The other creature, frighted with the flash of fire and the noise of the
gun, swam on shore, and ran up directly to the mountains from whence they
came; nor could I, at that distance, know what it was.  I found quickly
the negroes wished to eat the flesh of this creature, so I was willing to
have them take it as a favour from me; which, when I made signs to them
that they might take him, they were very thankful for.  Immediately they
fell to work with him; and though they had no knife, yet, with a
sharpened piece of wood, they took off his skin as readily, and much more
readily, than we could have done with a knife.  They offered me some of
the flesh, which I declined, pointing out that I would give it them; but
made signs for the skin, which they gave me very freely, and brought me a
great deal more of their provisions, which, though I did not understand,
yet I accepted.  I then made signs to them for some water, and held out
one of my jars to them, turning it bottom upward, to show that it was
empty, and that I wanted to have it filled.  They called immediately to
some of their friends, and there came two women, and brought a great
vessel made of earth, and burnt, as I supposed, in the sun, this they set
down to me, as before, and I sent Xury on shore with my jars, and filled
them all three.  The women were as naked as the men.


I believe the reader of this will not think it strange if I confess that
these anxieties, these constant dangers I lived in, and the concern that
was now upon me, put an end to all invention, and to all the contrivances
that I had laid for my future accommodations and conveniences.  I had the
care of my safety more now upon my hands than that of my food.  I cared
not to drive a nail, or chop a stick of wood now, for fear the noise I
might make should be heard: much less would I fire a gun for the same
reason: and above all I was intolerably uneasy at making any fire, lest
the smoke, which is visible at a great distance in the day, should betray
me.  For this reason, I removed that part of my business which required
fire, such as burning of pots and pipes, &c., into my new apartment in
the woods; where, after I had been some time, I found, to my unspeakable
consolation, a mere natural cave in the earth, which went in a vast way,
and where, I daresay, no savage, had he been at the mouth of it, would be
so hardy as to venture in; nor, indeed, would any man else, but one who,
like me, wanted nothing so much as a safe retreat.
 I had pursued this resolution about ten days longer, as I have said,
I began to see that the land was inhabited; and in two or three places,
as we sailed by, we saw people stand upon the shore to look at us; we
could also perceive they were quite black and naked.  I was once inclined
to have gone on shore to them; but Xury was my better counsellor, and
said to me, "No go, no go."  However, I hauled in nearer the shore that I
might talk to them, and I found they ran along the shore by me a good
way.  I observed they had no weapons in their hand, except one, who had a
long slender stick, which Xury said was a lance, and that they could
throw them a great way with good aim; so I kept at a distance, but talked
with them by signs as well as I could; and particularly made signs for
something to eat: they beckoned to me to stop my boat, and they would
fetch me some meat.  Upon this I lowered the top of my sail and lay by,
and two of them ran up into the country, and in less than half-an-hour
came back, and brought with them two pieces of dried flesh and some corn,
such as is the produce of their country; but we neither knew what the one
or the other was; however, we were willing to accept it, but how to come
at it was our next dispute, for I would not venture on shore to them, and
they were as much afraid of us; but they took a safe way for us all, for
they brought it to the shore and laid it down, and went and stood a great
way off till we fetched it on board, and then came close to us again.

The mouth of this hollow was at the bottom of a great rock, where, by
mere accident (I would say, if I did not see abundant reason to ascribe
all such things now to Providence), I was cutting down some thick
branches of trees to make charcoal; and before I go on I must observe the
reason of my making this charcoal, which was this--I was afraid of making
a smoke about my habitation, as I said before; and yet I could not live
there without baking my bread, cooking my meat, &c.; so I contrived to
burn some wood here, as I had seen done in England, under turf, till it
became chark or dry coal: and then putting the fire out, I preserved the
coal to carry home, and perform the other services for which fire was
wanting, without danger of smoke.  But this is by-the-bye.  While I was
cutting down some wood here, I perceived that, behind a very thick branch
of low brushwood or underwood, there was a kind of hollow place: I was
curious to look in it; and getting with difficulty into the mouth of it,
I found it was pretty large, that is to say, sufficient for me to stand
upright in it, and perhaps another with me: but I must confess to you
that I made more haste out than I did in, when looking farther into the
place, and which was perfectly dark, I saw two broad shining eyes of some
creature, whether devil or man I knew not, which twinkled like two stars;
the dim light from the cave's mouth shining directly in, and making the
reflection.  However, after some pause I recovered myself, and began to
call myself a thousand fools, and to think that he that was afraid to see
the devil was not fit to live twenty years in an island all alone; and
that I might well think there was nothing in this cave that was more
frightful than myself.  Upon this, plucking up my courage, I took up a
firebrand, and in I rushed again, with the stick flaming in my hand: I
had not gone three steps in before I was almost as frightened as before;
for I heard a very loud sigh, like that of a man in some pain, and it was
followed by a broken noise, as of words half expressed, and then a deep
sigh again.  I stepped back, and was indeed struck with such a surprise
that it put me into a cold sweat, and if I had had a hat on my head, I
will not answer for it that my hair might not have lifted it off.  But
still plucking up my spirits as well as I could, and encouraging myself a
little with considering that the power and presence of God was
everywhere, and was able to protect me, I stepped forward again, and by
the light of the firebrand, holding it up a little over my head, I saw
lying on the ground a monstrous, frightful old he-goat, just making his
will, as we say, and gasping for life, and, dying, indeed, of mere old
age.  I stirred him a little to see if I could get him out, and he
essayed to get up, but was not able to raise himself; and I thought with
myself he might even lie there--for if he had frightened me, so he would
certainly fright any of the savages, if any of them should be so hardy as
to come in there while he had any life in him.

I was now recovered from my surprise, and began to look round me, when I
found the cave was but very small--that is to say, it might be about
twelve feet over, but in no manner of shape, neither round nor square, no
hands having ever been employed in making it but those of mere Nature.  I
observed also that there was a place at the farther side of it that went
in further, but was so low that it required me to creep upon my hands and
knees to go into it, and whither it went I knew not; so, having no
candle, I gave it over for that time, but resolved to go again the next
day provided with candles and a tinder-box, which I had made of the lock
of one of the muskets, with some wildfire in the pan.

Accordingly, the next day I came provided with six large candles of my
own making (for I made very good candles now of goat's tallow, but was
hard set for candle-wick, using sometimes rags or rope-yarn, and
sometimes the dried rind of a weed like nettles); and going into this low
place I was obliged to creep upon all-fours as I have said, almost ten
yards--which, by the way, I thought was a venture bold enough,
considering that I knew not how far it might go, nor what was beyond it.
good laugh; you all stay here,
me show you good laugh."  So down he sits, and gets off his boots in a
moment, and puts on a pair of pumps (as we call the flat shoes they wear,
and which he had in his pocket), gives my other servant his horse, and
with his gun away he flew, swift like the wind.

The bear was walking softly on, and offered to meddle with nobody, till
Friday coming pretty near, calls to him, as if the bear could understand
him.  "Hark ye, hark ye," says Friday, "me speakee with you."  We
followed at a distance, for now being down on the Gascony side of the
mountains, we were entered a vast forest, where the country was plain and
pretty open, though it had many trees in it scattered here and there.
Friday, who had, as we say, the heels of the bear, came up with him
quickly, and took up a great stone, and threw it at him, and hit him just
on the head, but did him no more harm than if he had thrown it against a
wall; but it answered Friday's end, for the rogue was so void of fear
that he did it purely to make the bear follow him, and show us some laugh
as he called it.  As soon as the bear felt the blow, and saw him, he
turns about and comes after him, taking very long strides, and shuffling
on at a strange rate, so as would have put a horse to a middling gallop;
away reins Friday, and takes his course as if he ran towards us for help;
so we all resolved to fire at once upon the bear, and deliver my man;
though I was angry at him for bringing the bear back upon us, when he was
going about his own business another way; and especially I was angry that
he had turned the bear upon us, and then ran away; and I called out, "You
dog! is this your making us laugh?  Come away, and take your horse, that
we may shoot the creature."  He heard me, and cried out, "No shoot, no
shoot; stand still, and you get much laugh:" and as the nimble creature
ran two feet for the bear's one, he turned on a sudden on one side of us,
and seeing a great oak-tree fit for his purpose, he beckoned to us to
follow; and doubling his pace, he got nimbly up the tree, laying his gun
down upon the ground, at about five or six yards from the bottom of the
tree.  The bear soon came to the tree, and we followed at a distance: the
first thing he did he stopped at the gun, smelt at it, but let it lie,
and up he scrambles into the tree, climbing like a cat, though so
monstrous heavy.  I was amazed at the folly, as I thought it, of my man,
and could not for my life see anything to laugh at, till seeing the bear
get up the tree, we all rode near to him.

When we came to the tree, there was Friday got out to the small end of a
large branch, and the bear got about half-way to him.  As soon as the
bear got out to that part where the limb of the tree was weaker, "Ha!"
says he to us, "now you see me teachee the bear dance:" so he began
jumping and shaking the bough, at which the bear began to totter, but
stood still, and began to look behind him, to see how he should get back;
then, indeed, we did laugh heartily.  But Friday had not done with him by
a great deal; when seeing him stand still, he called out to him again, as
if he had supposed the bear could speak English, "What, you come no
farther? pray you come farther;" so he left jumping and shaking the tree;
and the bear, just as if he understood what he said, did come a little
farther; then he began jumping again, and the bear stopped again.  We
thought now was a good time to knock him in the head, and called to
Friday to stand still and we should shoot the bear: but he cried out
earnestly, "Oh, pray!  Oh, pray! no shoot, me shoot by and then:" he
would have said by-and-by.  However, to shorten the story, Friday danced
so much, and the bear stood so ticklish, that we had laughing enough, but
still could not imagine what the fellow would do: for first we thought he
depended upon shaking the bear off; and we found the bear was too cunning
for that too; for he would not go out far enough to be thrown down, but
clung fast with his great broad claws and feet, so that we could not
imagine what would be the end of it, and what the jest would be at last.
But Friday put us out of doubt quickly: for seeing the bear cling fast to
the bough, and that he would not be persuaded to come any farther, "Well,
well," says Friday, "you no come farther, me go; you no come to me, me
come to you;" and upon this he went out to the smaller end, where it
would bend with his weight, and gently let himself down by it, sliding
down the bough till he came near enough to jump down on his feet, and
away he ran to his gun, took it up, and stood still.  "Well," said I to
him, "Friday, what will you do now?  Why don't you shoot him?"  "No
shoot," says Friday, "no yet; me shoot now, me no kill; me stay, give you
one more laugh:" and, indeed, so he did; for when the bear saw his enemy
gone, he came back from the bough, where he stood, but did it very
cautiously, looking behind him every step, and coming backward till he
got into the body of the tree, then, with the same hinder end foremost,
he came down the tree, grasping it with his claws, and moving one foot at
a time, very leisurely.  At this juncture, and just before he could set
his hind foot on the ground, Friday stepped up close to him, clapped the
muzzle of his piece into his ear, and shot him dead.  Then the rogue
turned about to see if we did not laugh; and when he saw we were pleased
by our looks, he began to laugh very loud.  "So we kill bear in my
country," says Friday.  "So you kill them?" says I; "why, you have no
guns."--"No," says he, "no gun, but shoot great much long arrow."  This
was a good diversion to us; but we were still in a wild place, and our
guide very much hurt, and what to do we hardly knew; the howling of
wolves ran much in my head; and, indeed, except the noise I once heard on
the shore of Africa, of which I have said something already, I never
heard anything that filled me with so much horror.

These things, and the approach of night, called us off, or else, as
Friday would have had us, we should certainly have taken the skin of this
monstrous creature off, which was worth saving; but we had near three
leagues to go, and our guide hastened us; so we left him, and went
forward on our journey.

The ground was still covered with snow, though not so deep and dangerous
as on the mountains; and the ravenous creatures, as we heard afterwards,
were come down into the forest and plain country, pressed by hunger, to
seek for food, and had done a great deal of mischief in the villages,
where they surprised the country people, killed a great many of their
sheep and horses, and some people too.

We had one dangerous place to pass, and our guide told us if there were
more wolves in the country we should find them there; and this was a
small plain, surrounded with woods on every side, and a long, narrow
defile, or lane, which we were to pass to get through the wood, and then
we should come to the village where we were to lodge.

It was within half-an-hour of sunset when we entered the wood, and a
little after sunset when we came into the plain: we met with nothing in
the first wood, except that in a little plain within the wood, which was
not above two furlongs over, we saw five great wolves cross the road,
full speed, one after another, as if they had been in chase of some
prey, and had it in view; they took no notice of us, and were gone out
of sight in a few moments.  Upon this, our guide, who, by the way, was
but a fainthearted fellow, bid us keep in a ready posture, for he
believed there were more wolves a-coming.  We kept our arms ready, and
our eyes about us; but we saw no more wolves till we came through that
wood, which was near half a league, and entered the plain.  As soon as
we came into the plain, we had occasion enough to look about us.  The
first object we met with was a dead horse; that is to say, a poor horse
which the wolves had killed, and at least a dozen of them at work, we
could not say eating him, but picking his bones rather; for they had
eaten up all the flesh before. We did not think fit to disturb them at
their feast, neither did they take much notice of us.  Friday would have
let fly at them, but I would not suffer him by any means; for I found we
were like to have more business upon our hands than we were aware of.
We had not gone half over the plain when we began to hear the wolves
howl in the wood on our left in a frightful manner, and presently after
we saw about a hundred coming on directly towards us, all in a body, and
most of them in a line, as regularly as an army drawn up by experienced
officers.  I scarce knew in what manner to receive them, but found to
draw ourselves in a close line was the only way; so we formed in a
moment; but that we might not have too much interval, I ordered that
only every other man should fire, and that the others, who had not
fired, should stand ready to give them a second volley immediately, if
they continued to advance upon us; and then that those that had fired at
first should not pretend to load their fusees again, but stand ready,
every one with a pistol, for we were all armed with a fusee and a pair
of pistols each man; so we were, by this method, able to fire six
volleys, half of us at a time; however, at present we had no necessity;
for upon firing the first volley, the enemy made a full stop, being
terrified as well with the noise as with the fire.  Four of them being
shot in the head, dropped; several others were wounded, and went
bleeding off, as we could see by the snow.  I found they stopped, but
did not immediately retreat; whereupon, remembering that I had been told
that the fiercest creatures were terrified at the voice of a man, I
caused all the company to halloo as loud as they could; and I found the
notion not altogether mistaken; for upon our shout they began to retire
and turn about.  I then ordered a second volley to be fired in their
rear, which put them to the gallop, and away they went to the woods.
This gave us leisure to charge our pieces again; and that we might lose
no time, we kept going; but we had but little more than loaded our
fusees, and put ourselves in readiness, when we heard a terrible noise
in the same wood on our left, only that it was farther onward, the same
way we were to go.

The night was coming on, and the light began to be dusky, which made it
worse on our side; but the noise increasing, we could easily perceive
that it was the howling and yelling of those hellish creatures; and on a
sudden we perceived three troops of wolves, one on our left, one behind
us, and one in our front, so that we seemed to be surrounded with them:
however, as they did not fall upon us, we kept our way forward, as fast
as we could make our horses go, which, the way being very rough, was
only a good hard trot.  In this manner, we came in view of the entrance
of a wood, through which we were to pass, at the farther side of the
plain; but we were greatly surprised, when coming nearer the lane or
pass, we saw a confused number of wolves standing just at the entrance.
On a sudden, at another opening of the wood, we heard the noise of a
gun, and looking that way, out rushed a horse, with a saddle and a
bridle on him, flying like the wind, and sixteen or seventeen wolves
after him, full speed: the horse had the advantage of them; but as we
supposed that he could not hold it at that rate, we doubted not but they
would get up with him at last: no question but they did.

But here we had a most horrible sight; for riding up to the entrance
where the horse came out, we found the carcasses of another horse and of
two men, devoured by the ravenous creatures; and one of the men was no
doubt the same whom we heard fire the gun, for there lay a gun just by
him fired off; but as to the man, his head and the upper part of his body
was eaten up.  This filled us with horror, and we knew not what course to
take; but the creatures resolved us soon, for they gathered about us
presently, in hopes of prey; and I verily believe there were three
hundred of them.  It happened, very much to our advantage, that at the
entrance into the wood, but a little way from it, there lay some large
timber-trees, which had been cut down the summer before, and I suppose
lay there for carriage.  I drew my little troop in among those trees, and
placing ourselves in a line behind one long tree, I advised them all to
alight, and keeping that tree before us for a breastwork, to stand in a
triangle, or three fronts, enclosing our horses in the centre.  We did
so, and it was well we did; for never was a more furious charge than the
creatures made upon us in this place.  They came on with a growling kind
of noise, and mounted the piece of timber, which, as I said, was our
breastwork, as if they were only rushing upon their prey; and this fury
of theirs, it seems, was principally occasioned by their seeing our
horses behind us.  I ordered our men to fire as before, every other man;
and they took their aim so sure that they killed several of the wolves at
the first volley; but there was a necessity to keep a continual firing,
for they came on like devils, those behind pushing on those before.

When we had fired a second volley of our fusees, we thought they stopped
a little, and I hoped they would have gone off, but it was but a moment,
for others came forward again; so we fired two volleys of our pistols;
and I believe in these four firings we had killed seventeen or eighteen
of them, and lamed twice as many, yet they came on again.  I was loth to
spend our shot too hastily; so I called my servant, not my man Friday,
for he was better employed, for, with the greatest dexterity imaginable,
he had charged my fusee and his own while we were engaged--but, as I
said, I called my other man, and giving him a horn of powder, I had him
lay a train all along the piece of timber, and let it be a large train.
He did so, and had but just time to get away, when the wolves came up to
it, and some got upon it, when I, snapping an unchanged pistol close to
the powder, set it on fire; those that were upon the timber were scorched
with it, and six or seven of them fell; or rather jumped in among us with
the force and fright of the fire; we despatched these in an instant, and
the rest were so frightened with the light, which the night--for it was
now very near dark--made more terrible that they drew back a little; upon
which I ordered our last pistols to be fired off in one volley, and after
that we gave a shout; upon this the wolves turned tail, and we sallied
immediately upon near twenty lame ones that we found struggling on the
ground, and fell to cutting them with our swords, which answered our
expectation, for the crying and howling they made was better understood
by their fellows; so that they all fled and left us.

We had, first and last, killed about threescore of them, and had it been
daylight we had killed many more.  The field of battle being thus
cleared, we made forward again, for we had still near a league to go.  We
heard the ravenous creatures howl and yell in the woods as we went
several times, and sometimes we fancied we saw some of them; but the snow
dazzling our eyes, we were not certain.  In about an hour more we came to
the town where we were to lodge, which we found in a terrible fright and
all in arms; for, it seems, the night before the wolves and some bears
had broken into the village, and put them in such terror that they were
obliged to keep guard night and day, but especially in the night, to
preserve their cattle, and indeed their people.

The next morning our guide was so ill, and his limbs swelled so much with
the rankling of his two wounds, that he could go no farther; so we were
obliged to take a new guide here, and go to Toulouse, where we found a
warm climate, a fruitful, pleasant country, and no snow, no wolves, nor
anything like them; but when we told our story at Toulouse, they told us
it was nothing but what was ordinary in the great forest at the foot of
the mountains, especially when the snow lay on the ground; but they
inquired much what kind of guide we had got who would venture to bring us
that way in such a severe season, and told us it was surprising we were
not all devoured.  When we told them how we placed ourselves and the
horses in the middle, they blamed us exceedingly, and told us it was
fifty to one but we had been all destroyed, for it was the sight of the
horses which made the wolves so furious, seeing their prey, and that at
other times they are really afraid of a gun; but being excessively
hungry, and raging on that account, the eagerness to come at the horses
had made them senseless of danger, and that if we had not by the
continual fire, and at last by the stratagem of the train of powder,
mastered them, it had been great odds but that we had been torn to
pieces; whereas, had we been content to have sat still on horseback, and
fired as horsemen, they would not have taken the horses so much for their
own, when men were on their backs, as otherwise; and withal, they told us
that at last, if we had stood altogether, and left our horses, they would
have been so eager to have devoured them, that we might have come off
safe, especially having our firearms in our hands, being so many in
number.  For my part, I was never so sensible of danger in my life; for,
seeing above three hundred devils come roaring and open-mouthed to devour
us, and having nothing to shelter us or retreat to, I gave myself over
for lost; and, as it was, I believe I shall never care to cross those
mountains again: I think I would much rather go a thousand leagues by
sea, though I was sure to meet with a storm once a-week.

I have nothing uncommon to take notice of in my passage through
France--nothing but what other travellers have given an account of with
much more advantage than I can.  I travelled from Toulouse to Paris, and
without any considerable stay came to Calais, and landed safe at Dover
the 14th of January, after having had a severe cold season to travel in.

I was now come to the centre of my travels, and had in a little time all
my new-discovered estate safe about me, the bills of exchange which I
brought with me having been currently paid.

My principal guide and privy-counsellor was my good ancient widow, who,
in gratitude for the money I had sent her, thought no pains too much nor
care too great to employ for me; and I trusted her so entirely that I was
perfectly easy as to the security of my effects; and, indeed, I was very
happy from the beginning, and now to the end, in the unspotted integrity
of this good gentlewoman.

And now, having resolved to dispose of my plantation in the Brazils, I
wrote to my old friend at Lisbon, who, having offered it to the two
merchants, the survivors of my trustees, who lived in the Brazils, they
accepted the offer, and remitted thirty-three thousand pieces of eight to
a correspondent of theirs at Lisbon to pay for it.

In return, I signed the instrument of sale in the form which they sent
from Lisbon, and sent it to my old man, who sent me the bills of exchange
for thirty-two thousand eight hundred pieces of eight for the estate,
reserving the payment of one hundred moidores a year to him (the old man)
during his life, and fifty moidores afterwards to his son for his life,
which I had promised them, and which the plantation was to make good as a
rent-charge.  And thus I have given the first part of a life of fortune
and adventure--a life of Providence's chequer-work, and of a variety
which the world will seldom be able to show the like of; beginning
foolishly, but closing much more happily than any part of it ever gave me
leave so much as to hope for.

Any one would think that in this state of complicated good fortune I was
past running any more hazards--and so, indeed, I had been, if other
circumstances had concurred; but I was inured to a wandering life, had no
family, nor many relations; nor, however rich, had I contracted fresh
acquaintance; and though I had sold my estate in the Brazils, yet I could
not keep that country out of my head, and had a great mind to be upon the
wing again; especially I could not resist the strong inclination I had to
see my island, and to know if the poor Spaniards were in being there.  My
true friend, the widow, earnestly dissuaded me from it, and so far
prevailed with me, that for almost seven years she prevented my running
abroad, during which time I took my two nephews, the children of one of
my brothers, into my care; the eldest, having something of his own, I
bred up as a gentleman, and gave him a settlement of some addition to his
estate after my decease.  The other I placed with the captain of a ship;
and after five years, finding him a sensible, bold, enterprising young
fellow, I put him into a good ship, and sent him to sea; and this young
fellow afterwards drew me in, as old as I was, to further adventures
myself.

In the meantime, I in part settled myself here; for, first of all, I
married, and that not either to my disadvantage or dissatisfaction, and
had three children, two sons and one daughter; but my wife dying, and my
nephew coming home with good success from a voyage to Spain, my
inclination to go abroad, and his importunity, prevailed, and engaged me
to go in his ship as a private trader to the East Indies; this was in the
year 1694.

In this voyage I visited my new colony in the island, saw my successors
the Spaniards, had the old story of their lives and of the villains I
left there; how at first they insulted the poor Spaniards, how they
afterwards agreed, disagreed, united, separated, and how at last the
Spaniards were obliged to use violence with them; how they were subjected
to the Spaniards, how honestly the Spaniards used them--a history, if it
were entered into, as full of variety and wonderful accidents as my own
part--particularly, also, as to their battles with the Caribbeans, who
landed several times upon the island, and as to the improvement they made
upon the island itself, and how five of them made an attempt upon the
mainland, and brought away eleven men and five women prisoners, by which,
at my coming, I found about twenty young children on the island.

Here I stayed about twenty days, left them supplies of all necessary
things, and particularly of arms, powder, shot, clothes, tools, and two
workmen, which I had brought from England with me, viz. a carpenter and a
smith.

Besides this, I shared the lands into parts with them, reserved to myself
the property of the whole, but gave them such parts respectively as they
agreed on; and having settled all things with them, and engaged them not
to leave the place, I left them there.

From thence I touched at the Brazils, from whence I sent a bark, which I
bought there, with more people to the island; and in it, besides other
supplies, I sent seven women, being such as I found proper for service,
or for wives to such as would take them.  As to the Englishmen, I
promised to send them some women from England, with a good cargo of
necessaries, if they would apply themselves to planting--which I
afterwards could not perform.  The fellows proved very honest and
diligent after they were mastered and had their properties set apart for
them.  I sent them, also, from the Brazils, five cows, three of them
being big with calf, some sheep, and some hogs, which when I came again
were considerably increased.

But all these things, with an account how three hundred Caribbees came
and invaded them, and ruined their plantations, and how they fought with
that whole number twice, and were at first defeated, and one of them
killed; but at last, a storm destroying their enemies' canoes, they
famished or destroyed almost all the rest, and renewed and recovered the
possession of their plantation, and still lived upon the island.

All these things, with some very surprising incidents in some new
adventures of my own, for ten years more, I shall give a farther account
of in the Second Part of my Story.




***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LIFE AND ADVENTURES OF ROBINSON
CRUSOE***


******* This file should be named 521.txt or 521.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/5/2/521



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.org/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

